hello so this is a response for Andy who
asked a question that I've been asked
before and which I'm sure will be asked
in the future which is where exactly the
disagreement between David Deutsch and
sam Harris lay within the second podcast
video the waking up podcast of sam
harris where he interviewed David
Deutsch again for a second time this
time specifically about the moral
landscape I think that was Sam's third
or fourth book during that podcast one
of the first things that David said was
that it's very difficult to articulate
precisely what the disagreement is
because they come from such different
places when it in terms of the
epistemology and so the kinds of
vocabulary that David use the kind of
vocabulary that David uses as prosaic
and as common as it might be has a very
different meaning in the proper Ian
sense than it does for many many
academic philosophers and so this has
the consequence that anyone trained in
academic philosophy strangely enough is
often particularly poorly placed to
really understand the popillia notion of
knowledge and the perparing notion of
knowledge is ironically in some way
closer to the common sense notion of
what acknowledges the academic version
of what knowledge is following on from
Plato often has these overtones of
certainty and justification and
foundation and belief and the perp Irian
idea is far more fallibilist and an anti
foundationalist it's more about trying
to guess what is true and then checking
whether or not your guess is correct so
this idea that they were both speak in
different languages is something that
David Flags early on and it's humorous
in retrospect because when you listen to
the entire podcast I've done a few times
now that flag that David plans about the
fact they're speaking different
languages highlights every single error
that appears to occur throughout the
conversation
where David will make a point and
explain precisely what the disagreement
is and Sam doesn't understand and it's
no fault of Sam it's not like he's
incapable of understanding but he has an
epistemology following Plato that it's
possible to have a foundation and indeed
it's desirable to have a foundation and
although Sam can make noises that sound
as though he's not an infallible us
thinker as though he he isn't striving
for a particular certain way of thinking
nonetheless what he said is reveals
precisely what his internal psychology
is on these matters although he can
probably give a good definition of what
fallibilism is ultimately and this
happens on many many topics he's not a
fallibilist he's definitely a rational
person and he's very reasonable and he's
trying to reach the truth like we all
are but as we will say I've written a
few notes of examples where he has or he
explicitly reveals the fact that he's
not a fallibilist that he thinks that
it's possible to finally grok the answer
whether it's in morality or whether it's
in science so we'll get there eventually
and I'll attempt to explain exactly
where this chasm of difference is
between the two and this is why it's
very difficult for the majority of
people who hear the podcast to
understand where the disagreement is
because when they hear words like
knowledge or when they hear words like
foundation they're hearing something
different to what somebody who has read
Papa voice read doy understands these
words to mean in the last video I did
about the beginning of infinity was
chapter four creation there's a section
there where David speaks about how
knowledge must thought how knowledge is
created inside of a human mind we don't
know a lot of details but we know
something we know it can't be
spontaneously
now that might seem like a again a
prosaic sort of mundane vanilla thing to
say but it means that the bucket theory
of mind is false it means that when
you're using words you cannot download
what you think those words mean into the
person with whom you're having a
conversation you can't download it from
your brain into their brain
they've got a certain understanding of
what the words that you're using mean
and you've got a certain understanding
of what the words you're using me and
you can try and explain them using other
words but then those other words you use
in order to explain the words that
you're using might not do the job and
this is an example this is a wonderful
example this conversation of where David
says up front that the words that he's
using have a different sense to what
they have inside of Sam's mind Flags it
but and and tries to explain again and
again throughout the conversation but
and although Sam admits that he is
willing to go there with David willing
to grant him certain things he never
really does and so the error never quite
gets corrected and so therefore the end
of the conversation Sam isn't sure where
the disagreement is the majority of
people who have a an alternative
epistemology something other than what
Karl Popper
views knowledge as for example they
think that knowledge is about justified
true belief they think that you need to
begin with the foundation and on that
foundation then you accumulate knowledge
you build it up and this is an anti
critical vision about how knowledge is
created in the preparing of you you
simply have problems you can start
anywhere at all and you attempt to solve
those problems when you have them when
you have ideas that are in conflict with
whatever by using a critical method it's
a completely different vision instead of
accumulating and building you're kind of
refining and cutting things down and
re-establishing new ideas or improving
new ideas so there's no reason to think
of knowledge as this sort of base that
you begin with and then you're
constructing towers and then at some
point you finish the tower of course
under that vision in the poppy Rhian
view it is literally an infinite process
has not easy to visualize that I guess
people want a visual sense of what's
going on there but we're talking about
the abstract growth of knowledge not the
construction of buildings also very
early on in the conversation and this is
another hint about there's there's
there's problems with process here and I
guess there's problems with psychology
or even linguistics the problem with
process here is that Sam is that David
very early on says ok we'll let me
explain what the disagreement is and
then begins to preface what he's about
to say but before he gets to the main
point sam interrupts and and this
happens in conversations and so it never
quite seems as though David is able to
get to explaining precisely what he is
except that it's embedded in various
other parts of the conversation and so
this again will leave a typical listener
perhaps with the impression that David
never actually did what he said he was
going to do which is to articulate where
the disagreement was he does so but it
it occurs some many minutes after he
says now I'm going to explain what the
disagreement is because Sam interrupts
as a natural conversation would have
these interruptions okay so the
preparing vision is that knowledge is
always conjectural its guest and so when
we're talking about what will increase
the well-being of conscious creatures
which is what Sam is concerned about as
kind of if not the foundation then the
purpose of morality the purpose of
morality is to maximize the well-being
of conscious creatures however if we are
going to attempt to maximize the
well-being of conscious creatures and
then we're kind of guessing what their
states are going to be and we will
and we can also come to see later on
that Sam sees the well-being of
conscious creatures as intimately tied
to their biology that he doesn't take
seriously the notion of substrate
independence a let alone the
universality of human beings human
beings have a universal mind and so
therefore there will be no pen depandi
ro science their neurology it cannot
depend upon the particular makeup of
neurons inside their brains so instead
just to preface what morality
really consists of it's about solving
moral problems and in order to solve
moral problems we have to conjecture
explanations about what might improve
things and they can always be false we
can always criticize them and that
includes any starting point that we
might have if we think that we need to
start with the well-being of conscious
creatures that could change especially
insofar as we refine what we mean by
conscious creatures now another thing
that I got the sense that Sam might have
been hinting at and this is early on is
he wants to defend the thesis that moral
truth exists and I'm working there and I
think David's working there as well
moral truth absolutely exists and it
exists in a similar way to the way that
mathematical truth exists and at some
point I think David actually does indeed
mention that that there's this kind of
objectivity to mathematical truth and to
moral truth neither of which are
dependent upon the truth about physical
reality physical reality is a separate
kind of objectivity to what mathematical
reality is they can be truths in
mathematical reality that do not depend
upon what's going on in physical reality
one such truth is that for example the
decimal expansion of Pi is infinite but
it is impossible in physical reality to
represent that anywhere because there
simply aren't enough atoms in the
universe or even the multiverse
you need a little truly infinite number
of particles an infinite number of
different states of the universe in
order to represent this decimal
expansion of pi but the infinite decimal
expansion of Pi exists out there in
abstract and mathematical reality it's a
thing so the other thing here is a
distinction between abstract objective
abstract objective ontological reality
that's out there in terms of mathematics
or indeed in terms of the laws of
physics whatever the true laws of
physics actually are they exist they
absolutely exist but our knowledge of
those laws of physics like our knowledge
of mathematics or our knowledge of
morality so this is the difference again
between ontology and epistemology
ontology is what is true in reality now
what is true in reality we don't know
all we have are fallible explanations of
that reality the fallible explanations
of that reality are not that reality
this is true of physics where the laws
of physics absolutely absolutely exist
they're really real we don't know what
they are exactly we have approximations
to them and so for example we used to
think that the glory was Newtonian
Newton's law of gravity which looks like
F equals G m1 m2 over R squared we now
know that's false that works within a
certain domain it's extremely useful for
solving particular problems but
ultimately it's false and you can do
experiments to show that it's false and
it fails in certain regards the same is
true of mathematical truth mathematical
ontological truth is out there what we
have are explanations of that
ontological truth so we have epistemic
claims which are just things that we
write down things that we understand in
our brains about that reality it doesn't
matter what the domain of inquiry
happens to be whether it's science on
Maddox immorality there are truths in
each of these areas they are part of
reality but we only have because we are
fallible humans we don't have direct
access to any of them
we're fallible and so when Sam says that
moral truth exists it's not entirely
clear whether he thinks that we have
direct access to it then at times I
think that he thinks we may be able to
get that truth in hand and I'm not
convinced by that again I'm a fallible
as David's a fallible and so this is one
of the areas of disagreement when people
made the noises on the subject as if to
say we're nearly there
we're about to find out what the truth
happens to be or in some distant future
we're going to know what the truth is so
I'll just move on to I just move on to
foundationalism so foundationalism is
this idea that that you can you begin
with the foundation and then on that
foundation you build up the rest of your
knowledge but it's the idea you need to
begin somewhere you've got to start
somewhere
you know your axioms your premises and
and and from that you can derive
everything else that you need to know
that this is a platonic mistake this
idea that you just begin here and then
you justify justify justify justify and
eventually you keep on justifying in
your reach the end because you found
everything that needs to be understood
this is completely the opposite in many
many senses to what preparing
epistemology is about and about how
knowledge is constructed in reality
there's no reason to begin here because
we don't know that here is an absolute
truth we don't know that anything is an
absolute truth and so because of that
all we can do is to guess what might be
the case in order to solve any
particular problem we don't have to
worry about what the foundation is
there's no bedrock and even though
there's a final reality out there for
many many reasons we can't ever get to
that final reality
if this is part of the conception of the
beginning of unity all right so you can
always correct errors there are there is
an infinite amount to learn we are
fallible and so you can never be sure
that whenever you've discovered
something that appears to solve your
appears to solve your problem that
you're not going to find errors with it
now so we weed Sam when it comes to
morality he wants to kind of foundations
he wants to talk about morality as being
about the well-being of conscious
creatures and this idea the Nords who
established an objective morality in
order to begin somewhere let's consider
the thought experiment of the worst
possible misery for everyone so the
worst possible misery for all conscious
creatures and he says that if anything
is worth avoiding it's worth avoiding
that and we can agree that if there's
anything worth avoiding it's worth
avoiding that but there's no need for
this foundation there's no need to begin
there because it doesn't help us solve
any particular moral problem it's a
response or a critique to either
biblical ways of thinking or relativism
ok moral relativism or relative moral
relativism is this idea that your
morality depends upon the culture from
which you come or from the family in
which you find yourself or from your
particular frame of reference your
particular psychology determines what
your morality is and so Sam is right to
want to critique moral relativism this
idea that we shouldn't criticize other
cultures or criticize other people for
their moral beliefs and so if there
happens to be a culture out there
somewhere that thinks that if little
girls learn to read they should be
stoned to death then who are we to
criticize that culture and as sam says
in his very powerful TED talk on this
topic who are we not to criticize
such a culture so st. wants to respond
to the moral relativists by saying well
let's consider the worst possible misery
for everyone now a moral relativist
would say that no such state exists but
he's appealing to people to say you
can't go with the moral relativists
because the worst possible misery for
everyone is objectively bad and
therefore what is objectively good is
any movement away from that state now
this cannot be a foundation for morality
because as David points out in the
conversation later and as I think I've
observed in my response many years ago
to Sam Harris on this as well and in the
moral landscape challenge as soon as you
get a small distance away any distance
away from the worst possible misery for
everyone I think David says one
millimeter away from the the worst
possible music for everyone then what
then what that foundation that we begin
with is of no use whatsoever to allow us
to decide what to do next which is the
sphere of morality what do we do next
what should we do now and that's if
you're a millimeter away now we're you
know the year 2018 here on planet earth
we are a lot further away than one
millimeter away from the worst possible
misery for everyone so this was possible
music for everyone it is a critique of
the idea that there's no difference
between good and bad and as as a as a
critique over that it's a good critique
but it doesn't get you answers to moral
problems because where we are now we
have an infinite space of possibilities
before us and what do we do next depends
upon a whole raft of things about what
we value but what should we value isn't
also another part of morality so so sam
has this unalterable foundation wants to
begin with that I would say the only
purpose of which is as a critique of
relativism and the other is the
well-being of conscious
and the well-being of conscious
creatures insofar as that to the domain
within which we want to conceive
morality it has problems for human
beings because there cannot be a
dependence upon the biology and yet this
is the assumption this is the implicit
assumption that operates behind this and
we'll get to exactly why in a moment so
but but I just want to sort of fixate on
these two these two foundations one
being morality is about the well-being
of conscious creatures and the
difference is the difference between
good and evil can be articulated by
considering the worst possible misery
for everyone so we've got these two
moveable things now this is a a
misconception because it simply makes
the same mistake that religious thinkers
make which is that you need to begin
with a dogma you need to begin with this
unalterable foundation and upon these
two pillars that's where you build the
rest of your knowledge these things
cannot be criticized but this is false
this is wrong and even if your
intentions are good people's religious
people have good intentions the idea
that we need to begin with the Ten
Commandments the idea that we need to
begin with the fact that God exists or
love exists or that Jesus zoomed up to
heaven or that Mary was a virgin etc etc
etc people have good intentions in
wanting to enshrine Dogma in wanting to
enshrine a foundation now sam says while
he was willing to concede that this
could be wrong that this could be
fallible
however he refuses to admit but morality
could be anything other than about
conscious creatures and he says again
and again that this is his foundation so
why so why can't more L&E be about
conscious creatures why can't it purely
be about conscious creatures now Sam has
a pretty forceful argument in the moral
landscape about how if we were to
consider a universe in which there were
no conscious creatures then that by
definition would be a universe without
value okay
fine but but morality is a sphere of
truth of ontological truth
so those ontological truths actually
exist they're out there in abstract
reality and so they they occupy that
reality even if we can't find out what
they are perfectly and we can't they're
independent of the experiences of
conscious creatures so there might be
about the experience of conscious
creatures but they are independent of
conscious creatures and in particular
they cannot be about the neurology of
the conscious creatures and they can't
be about the neurology of conscious
creatures because human minds are
universal even if you could possibly
have a non universal mind okay like for
example if a if a cat has conscious
states those conscious states in
especially the monthly the universal
mind of the human being of a person can
in principle proven but heritage be
could in principle be downloaded onto a
computer we could be put into a matrix
at that point once our mind which is a
kind of program is put into a silicon
computer or whatever the computers of
the future happen to be then it cannot
possibly be the case the morality is
about anything to do with the biology of
the human brain
because we're going to have biological
brains anymore will be a universal
explainer inside of some kind of silicon
computer there's a time about half an
hour and I can't remember now but I had
to write myself a nut because I thought
this was a very valuable insight where
David says that the criterion by which
institutions should be judged is by how
good they aren't resolving disputes
between people without violence without
coercion and he's not saying he knows
what they are but this is an absolutely
crucial point
about politics and economics and
morality generally it means that the
scope of government for example is
extremely limited that if we want
political institutions that work and
there are moral institutions they cannot
be coercive and so when people consider
things like the welfare state and when
they have good intentions like replacing
the welfare state let's say with
something that's an incremental
improvement like universal basic income
nonetheless this requires some amount of
coercion that if Joe over here is not
owning much money however he's earning
just enough in order that you think that
he should hand over some of his money to
Mary because of universal basic income
then that will require a certain amount
of coercion the other way to avoid that
is to allow Joe to give Mary charity to
willingly voluntarily do this but the
people who argue for universal basic
income in the same way that people who
argue for welfare or the same way that
people who argue that socialism should
obtain or that communism should obtain
or any other kind of system in which the
government determines where the wealth
gets distributed where your wealth gets
distributed wants to implement a
coercive system and deutsches criterion
here is the being institution the
political institution needs to be judged
by how good it is of resolving disputes
between people without resorting to
coercion and so if you can't reason
someone into something then arguing that
we need to use force
especially to extract money or something
like that well that's clearly inferior
and because people have and this is tied
to fallibilism and it's tied to this
idea about what human beings are that
we're universally explain us that we can
come to understand each other that if
you have an idea and it's good and I'm a
reasonable person who's a universal
explainer then you will be able to use
words an argument and explain to me
why it is that your ideas better now in
discussions about economics and
government it seems to me to be the case
that very very often we end up in a
situation where one side throws up the
hands and says well I don't have I
cannot convince you nevertheless we need
to use force here we need to use a
mechanism whereby money has taken from
these people and given to those people
it's zero okay and David further adds
this is an important quote that there's
no limit to the possibility of removing
evil via knowledge and so it all evils
are caused by a lack of knowledge and so
therefore he's saying that whenever
there's a problem whenever there's an
evil or suffering then what we need to
try and bring to bear is knowledge we
need to bring some kind of creative
inspiration to that situation in order
to find a solution but coercion can't be
the thing now I'm going to read a direct
quote I've written something down that
Sam says word for word that's at the 49
minute 50 mark and he says imagine this
future of a completed science of the
mind where we not only understand the
brain basis or the computational basis
of every possible experience but we can
intervene as completely as we would want
and we now have this machine that I can
put on your head and we can dial in any
possible conscious state it's just this
perfect experience machine so that's a
two sentences it's a very long sentence
and then a short sentence but I just
want to emphasize this about sam Harris
who I admire I think he's got the best
podcast out there I read all of his
books I think he's a fantastic thinker
but I just want to emphasize that the
language he uses is no accident it's
anti fallibilist
it's foundationalist it's not popular
and even though he says various points
in the conversation that he's willing to
concede the fallibilist point his
underlying epistemology
shapes his psychology and therefore the
way in which he comprehends the world is
here in stark contrast against his
explicit statements so the explicit
statements about yes I'm a fellow
velocity us I'm willing to admit that I
could be wrong about this is very very
different to to what comes out and he's
just speaking naturally and so again he
says completed science so as if we can
we can finally broke the final answer we
can finally get there and we will get to
a point in science where there will be
nothing further to discover a completed
science if you didn't think that was
possible he wouldn't put the word
completed in there he would just say
imagine this future of science of the
mind where we not only understand the
brain basics cetera but he says
completed he also says every possible
experience as though that were possible
but as David goes on to explain it's not
possible to have every possible
experience you know written down in an
algorithm put into a computer enumerated
in a computer that simply isn't possible
and it's not possible because that
presumes that you can predict the
content of future knowledge so for
example the experience of what will be
discovered in a hundred years time
that's a possible experience the
experience of discovering something that
no one has yet discovered that
experience can't be put in there so you
can't have this machine that Sam wants
where you can put it on your head and
dial in any possible conscious state and
it can't be a perfect experience for
shame okay so how would it how would it
appear in rewrite this okay and again
I'm saying it's no accident that the way
in which he tries to conjure this so one
way of him you might write it is imagine
this future of a science of the mind
where we not only understand the brain
basis of a computational basis of the
experience but we can intervene as we
would intervene in any way we like and
we now have this machine that I can put
on your head and we can dial in
conscious states it's just this
experience machine ok so that would be
fine I think that that that would work
in a per curiam sense but because Sam
thinks that you can have this completed
science at the mind that you can have
these machines that could have all these
perfect states and you could just pick
the one that you like the most perfect
one then he thinks that you can get to a
peak and so these Peaks on the moral
landscape he thinks absolutely Peaks
upon which you can make no further
improvement of course then later on he
will say that I don't know I didn't mean
that I mean you can make improvements so
you know David interjected that at that
point with what I've said because he
says something along the lines of the
vast majority of states these conscious
states that are in this machine will
never know because we won't have the
knowledge the infinite majority will
always be unknown so it's a big
difference between Sam and David Sam
says we can dial in any possible
conscious state and David says the
overwhelming infinite majority will
always be unknown there's a big
difference between having every possible
conscious state and say in denying the
fact that you can and in fact the
infinite majority will forever not be
known that's a huge disagreement in
terms of quantity it's the difference
between zero and infinity um and David
use the example there is the experience
of knowing tomorrow's scientific
discovery which will never download but
Sam comes back and he says oh no he
didn't mean that these conscious states
would be finite but I think that's kind
of a fudge either the computer can
replicate all the possible states or it
can't and so if it can't then his
machine cannot be a perfect experience
machine it can't be based on a completed
science of the mind where you understand
all the ways in which the the
computational states or the brain states
relate to conscious experience and the
reason if we manage to find a way in
which to capture the mind inside of
silicon will happen will know what the
algorithm is for
the algorithm is for a human brain but
that doesn't mean that we will know what
every single computational state how
that how that relates to subjectivity
because there can still be an infinite
number an uncountably infinite number of
conscious states being able to write
down the algorithm for creativity
doesn't mean we know all the possible
outputs of that algorithm if it's a
creative algorithm we already happen to
be right there running on our brains
right now even if we knew what the
algorithm for creativity is in our own
brain that doesn't mean that you know
what the output is going to be because
presumably part of that algorithm has
the quality that it is a knowledge
creator and no knowledge creator can
predict the growth of knowledge that's
simply a fact of epistemology because as
soon as you create something new then
you're going to find errors and the
errors that you're going to find in that
eventually that bit of knowledge
eventually depends purely upon your
preferences and your freewill but this
is another probably a disagreement
between david and sam but but sam gives
this idea that that that he's wrong this
idea that he's wrong about his his
thought experiment that you can have
this completed science and that you can
have all the possible conscious stating
Sun cubes that short-shrift
anyone he wants to go back to the
feelings and this happens a lot in the
conversation he wants to go back to
considering how people either feel good
or they don't feel good and how you
could feel better and how you could feel
worse and so he just wants to consider
okay we'll just imagine that you could
feel like Mozart did during his best
moods or like John von Neumann during
his best notes what it would feel like
to be Mozart composing a symphony MA
that not have been a wonderful state to
be in
and and David points out that well this
idea and again at the David doesn't
quite use these words but it's this idea
that anchoring morality to pleasure
versus pain is misconceived
and when Sam talked about the worst
possible suffering for everyone
I think he really has in mind torture or
pain if some sort of physical type
suffering and you could turn up all the
pain receptors in in a conscious
creature and that would be the worst
possible misery and at the other end of
the dial you could just maximize
pleasure and so he starts to talk about
pleasure later but but he can't decouple
this idea of feelings sensations from
morality which is what David attempts to
do here when they start talking about
what it's like what it feels like to be
Mozart and Sam says you know it must be
a very happy kind of experience but
David said well there's there's pleasure
and then there's joy and the joy that
Mozart would have had is the joy of
solving problems in music so in what way
could you download what it's like to be
motor well perhaps you can download this
sensation but it wouldn't exactly be the
joy that Mozart felt because the joy
that motes had felt had a lot to do with
the fact that he just solved some
problem in music some problem in
composition and that has a certain
sensation associated with it sure but
the joy the enduring feeling of having a
solve the problem can only come from
having solved the problem now one might
want to say well you could download that
experience the experience of there being
Mozart and solving the problem but then
you would be Mozart
then you would be motor sight if you're
downloading his entire mind into your
own you're no longer yourself you're not
yourself having the experience of what
motor head you are motor because you are
solving the problem that he solved
you're valuing the problem in the way
that he valued it everything about you
is then tuned to being motor so it can't
be the case that you can simply download
sensations because happiness is a
product of doing something and so always
happiness is about solving problems
and suffering is a condition in which
you're throttled in some way you're
unable to perpetually solve your
problems or to solve a particular
problem and it's upsetting you so it's
about problems morality is about
problems so David is arguing that you
can't download the sensation of what it
was like to be Mozart or John von
Neumann or anyone without recreating
that individual person but Sam insists
that it can't you can have a form of
happiness that is independent of problem
solving and so he mentions a lot
pleasure and he mentions pain and so he
talks about how drugs or medication or
certain states during meditation like
enlightenment can give you a form of
happiness or pleasure that is
independent of what the that is
independent of problem-solving and and
everyone would agree that if and that an
opiate high might be pleasurable but
this is a temporary thing
and David points out that most heroin
addicts would suggest that the
experience of most heroin addicts would
precisely be that maybe at first when
people try a drug it's interesting and
new because you're having new sensations
but as time goes on if people are using
this drug all the time it becomes
increasingly boring there's nothing new
and so there might become addicted and
in fact that will become a real problem
that the pleasure is no longer coupled
to happiness the pleasure is now coupled
to unhappiness there is this deep divide
here it's real chasm another real chasm
between Sam arguing frequently that
morality is about feelings in some way
the well-being of conscious creatures
but also his every example is about some
kind of state of happiness or state of
pleasure or state of pain and david
wants to say that instead morality isn't
really about that
it's about solving moral problems and so
these are two different ways of viewing
what morality is about emotion versus
reason emotion and reason versus
problem-solving now Sam attempts our
thought experiment with the matrix and
the the interesting part here for me was
when and I can't really exact point of
the thought experiment but the
interesting part for me was where Sam
said that the morality morality of the
people within the matrix if you're if
you're inside this matrix and you're
just having a great time the morality of
the people within that computer program
isn't relevant because they're not real
people and then david says well then
that means are they're not creative so
it wouldn't be a pleasurable experience
to be inside of this matrix type
computer world because what you want
inside of this matrix type heaven let's
say we can make a matrix that was heaven
like but Sam saying that you could do
anything you like with the people that
are there because the people that are
there aren't real people and david says
well then that means they're not
creative by different by his definition
of what a person is a person's a
universal explainer a person is a
creative thing now if they're not
creative if these people inside the
matrix aren't creative then they can't
collaborate with you on any of your
problems they can't really help you with
any of your problems really because
they're not able to contribute to your
problem situation because all they have
is a finite set of responses that they
can probably give you like a non-player
character inside of some computer game
they're not really going to be able to
help you very much any more than
Wikipedia can help you but if it's a
real problem in your personal life
Wikipedia may or may not be helpful but
really what is other people ultimately
we want other people we need to
collaborate in order to get our problem
solved and our problems are important
insofar as there are other people that
around us that we want to solve their
problems we want them to help us anyway
we need other people now david says that
because of this because these other non
real people aren't creative that we'd
eventually notice that if we were inside
of this matrix that's kind of is heaven
like matrix then then we'd quickly
notice we'd noticed that they aren't
responding like normal people are and
Sam in response to this goes right so he
he seems not to get it or doesn't buy
that argument and to me this is another
chasm of difference between them between
the conception about what a person is so
same kind of things and this is the
prevailing conception that what we have
are computer programs that are maybe
artificially intelligent in some sense
and we have people and maybe we want to
agree that artificial general
intelligence is a person but then
there's kind of this continuum between
the two and then maybe there's something
further beyond artificial general
intelligence but this is simply false
you have only two states it really is a
binary thing right people don't like
this and say you're a black and white I
think a kind of thinking shades of gray
of course but not in this situation is
the difference between black and white
it is here because we have things that
are not creative and things that are
there's not partial degrees of
creativity either you can tackle a
problem because you're in you're a
universal explainer or you can't and so
so this is a difference as well okay
that that you have people and things
that aren't people you have
general-purpose explainers and things
that are not general purpose we are
general-purpose explainers and we want
to interact with other general-purpose
explainers other people then what's
valuable in this world they're the ones
that are likely to be conscious they're
creative they've got free will Sam won't
like that but creativity is the thing
that makes a universal explainer a
universal explainer and you quickly note
if something's not universally explained
it's not going to be able to give back
to you in the same way it's not whether
you're the same kind of love and
compassion and and and fun times that
that universally explainers or other
people are so there's a real difference
here there's a real chasm of
understanding once more
between Sam's idea about the centrality
of people in David's okay then then we
get into a section that there's a little
bit of a diversion I think more of a
distraction from from them the meat of
the disagreement and Sam talks about
meditation its utility and and and you
know I'd agree ad agreements and that
you know meditation is is a very useful
pleasurable thing it it has a whole
bunch of benefits and he says that that
state is a state in which you can have
happiness be not solving problems and I
profoundly disagreed and I was so glad
that this point this is where David
jumped in and said well you know that
could be because it might feel as though
you know this is the subjective feeling
in us not about subjective feelings and
so this is when Sam talks about
meditation he always talks about the
subjective feeling side of it and yes
there's a subjective feeling side of it
doesn't mean you can't be wrong about
your own subjective feelings but what
David contributes to this I was a very
dorky in response to meditation even
though he says it's not experienced it I
mean I'm not very experienced in the
area himself he says well the pleasure
that one might get from meditation might
be because you kind of dampened down
your conscious state and maybe in
dampening down your conscious state you
allow your unconscious mind and your
unconscious mind is real your
unconscious mind is there and it's
attempting to solve problems as well but
sometimes the conscious and the
unconscious probably have this
interaction where there could be
obstacles or blocks where your conscious
mind is just getting in the way of your
unconscious mind and meditation might
just cause your conscious mind to relax
for a while to go to the background for
a while allow your unconscious mind to
do its thing
and then it can solve problems
unconsciously so that when you go back
to your conscious mind suddenly you feel
a lot more creative and Sam admitted
that this is indeed subjectively the
case that he's had the experience of
feeling as though he's far more creative
after having meditated so it meaning
that that the pleasure of meditation
really is cashed out in what happens
after the meditation namely the problems
begin to be solved after the meditation
and a rate greater than what they were
before and he said that this is one of
the reasons that culture has taken on
meditation as being an important tool
because people recognize this that if
people are stressed or feeling bad or
depressed then meditation can be a very
good prescription to help that sort of
thing because it allows the problems
that are normally there to be dropped
but you don't simply drop them such that
they disappear you drop them such that
your unconscious mind during the
meditative state can do its thing
whatever that thing is so that at the
other end your conscious mind once you
come out of the meditative state maybe
it's days maybe it's weeks whatever is
able to work better on solving those
problems so it does come back to
problems there isn't this state of
pleasure with respect to morality
that is completely independent of
problem solving and so it's a key point
it's a key point
and so what I'd say there about the
meditative state and I've tried to
mention this before when Sam's talked
about it is that a lot of what's going
on in the meditative state this feeling
of the divestment of I the feeling that
you no longer a you you're a witness of
your conscious experience as Sam would
say that you really do feel kind of a
distance between you and objective
reality or even you and your thoughts
you look at the thoughts as objects fine
get it great but this is only to say
that that state is very difficult to
describe it's exactly the same as the
difficulty of trying to describe what
the color blue looks like to you to
someone else who's looking at the same
sky let's say
so it's the difficulty of trying to
articulate what qualia are like we don't
know how and that's all that that is
that this in explicit type knowledge
that we have we know we have subjective
knowledge we know what the sky looks
like I know what the sky looks like but
I can't put it into words it's in
explicit and the same is true of the
meditative state and this is a mystery
for now but it's just a problem like how
do we do it okay well we can't do it now
I don't see it as being some sort of
reason to think there's something
massively spiritual or hugely mysterious
about this area it could be the case but
it could just be a mundane problem it
might just turn out to be among that
problem someone hasn't thought of the
solution okay so again David says that
moral theories should be approached like
scientific theories they don't need
foundations they don't need foundations
and that that the there are a lot of
theories out there a lot of moral
theories like cants categorical
imperative okay or Rawls as fairness or
stuff that comes out of the Bible or the
the Golden Rule etc etc etc whatever
your moral theory happens to be or
indeed Sam's own well-being of conscious
creatures all of these these principles
these ideas these theories should be
seeing as critiques as critiques of each
other or as critiques of any other
theory that someone proposes or as a
critique of a solution that someone
proposes they shouldn't be seen as
foundations from which you begin to
build up everything else okay and any
response to to David saying that that
these these particular theories these
famous theories from utilitarianism to
cancer categorical imperative to
believing in natural law like cetera et
cetera in response to this Sam says let
me recap your eyes my foundation and he
goes on so he hasn't
what David has said about
foundationalism or insofar as he's heard
it he's heard something different to
what David was trying to you to impart
to him the receiver of the message and
the sender of the message I'm not
guaranteed to get the same message but
the message that the sender sends is not
the message that the receiver is
guaranteed to get it depends upon error
correction and and and there's no good
way to know what the method of error
correction is in order to ensure that
someone's idea or that your idea gets
into someone else's mind we don't know
how to do that we always make mistakes
and so I think this is another example
here that same just says that
off-the-cuff it depart it's part of his
psychology part of his vocabulary it's
part of his way of viewing the world of
thinking about these matters about
thinking about morality and epistemology
that you have a foundation you need a
foundation he doesn't understand that
you don't need one that's why he
continues to return to it and he just
wants to re-explain it and so you said
to David Dale just let me really my
feeling you're not accepting my
foundation and I know you're against
foundationalism David but let me explain
my foundation I can't be the only one
that sees the problem there so and just
to emphasize that this comes from from
Chapter four of the beginning of an
affinity where David really articulates
this to understand stuff to learn we
human beings have to conjecture and
explanation but Sam on the other hand is
working within our foundation was sort
of an auntie fallibilist framework and
although he says he explicitly isn't
doing that he doesn't need to do that
to me it sounds very much like a person
who says something like I'm I'm not
religious really I'm not religious but
now let me explain to you the divinity
of God and how Jesus zoomed up to heaven
and how I got a massively Sunday so on
the one hand the person saying that are
religious and on the other hand with
every utterance they make they are
articulating and announcing to the world
the ways in which they're religious and
so
yeah Sam is saying he
he's a fellow bolused and he he doesn't
need these foundations but he's
explaining again and again and again
with his foundation so this is the big
difference this is the huge difference
of opinion that they have that one
person is arguing that a foundation is
important and the other one is saying
that that's the very mistake that you're
making and the other one thing goes back
to argue and say well if you don't like
that foundation let me explain the other
one and David is saying well but you
don't need the foundation you know then
you're not quite understanding what I'm
saying and Sam goes well okay well if
you don't like that foundation let me
explain what the foundation is and see
if that will convince you okay so this
is why there's not there's not as much
progress on that front as what they
might have been because they they're not
agreeing on what the word means I don't
know what Sam is hearing exactly but
he's hearing something like I don't I
just don't know what what Sam is hearing
at that point because at one point Sam
even says something like but but you
need a foundation like even pop hurry
and science needs a foundation and David
tries to say well no that's wrong David
says the but the idea that we need to
start anywhere is false
everything is criticizing well you don't
need to start in a particular place I
need to start down here or up there or
anywhere else what you have are moral
problems and then you need to approach
those moral problems with a critical eye
in the same way in science if David has
a problem in quantum computation he
really doesn't need to look at what the
foundations of of all of science happens
to be or what all of physics happens to
be now they might be ways in which they
can critique his solution to a
particular problem in quantum
computation yeah let's say for example
he decides to create some algorithm to
run on a quantum computer but the
algorithm requires that parts of the
quantum computer exceed the switches
that required a quantum computer to have
switching speeds that exceed the speed
of light well relativity would be a
critique of that
that wouldn't be possible and so that
could be ruled out but it's not like he
always has to begin with some particular
set of facts and then from that build up
if he has a problem
so namely if there's a problem anywhere
in science then you solve that problem
without being too concerned about what
else is beneath that again there's a
point where where Sam gets into feelings
again and so David comes back with or if
you consider someone like Isaac Newton
Isaac Newton would have been quite happy
when you're solving problems no doubt
that state of mind he was in was just as
happy as anything that people today have
just as happy as when David invented the
theory of quantum computation or Edward
Witten solves a problem in string theory
Newton would have had that when he found
the universal law of gravitation let's
say however his state of comfort would
have been god-awful it would have been
terrible his clothes would have etched
his food would have been terrible his
baths would have been cold he would have
been cold there would have been a whole
bunch of reason to my hero themed
uncomfortable compared to us and so it
can't be due to comfort or pleasure or
the absence or presence of pain that
this idea of happiness can be cashed out
our happiness is kind of independent of
those things it's about solving your
problems whatever your problems happen
to be and it doesn't need to be this
snobbish thing of like you need to find
the next universal law of gravitation it
could be anything in your own personal
life all problems are parochial is just
what you happen to be interested in but
so long as you're solving them then
that's what will make you happy so long
as the problems are interesting and
worthwhile that they don't need to be
this profound type thing and it doesn't
need to be anchored to creature comforts
in the far distant future people will
look back and think how uncomfortable we
are Here I am sitting in their silly
chair maybe in the distant future people
will look at a video like this and go oh
my god I used to sit in chairs like that
how ridiculous without floating around
on clouds how could those poor people
sam says at some point but there might
be aliens out there that have
available to them states of mind states
of pleasure that we do not have
available to us the biology of our mind
might foreclose certain states and again
this is a profound misunderstanding of
David Deutsch is understanding of what a
person is David which is discovery of
what a person is as a universal
knowledge creator given that our minds a
universal there can be no such state
because our minds can access any state
it doesn't depend upon our biology Sam
insists at this point in the
conversation that it does depend on our
biology but it doesn't and it can't
because our our minds our substrate
independent we can one day be downloaded
into computers so we are not foreclosed
about having certain experiences our
minds or any universal we don't even
need more processing speed or more
memory power in order to do this ok our
minds a universal and if we did need
more memory well then let's hook
ourselves up to a computer but I find
that completely implausible and David
points out that discoveries and Murrell
you must always create more problems
Sam mentions that well this is just a
local wrinkle again this idea that in
the distant future
Sam has this conception that we will be
in a less problematic state than what
we're in today and it's just wrong he
thinks that will be almost there will
just be ironing out the wrinkles again
this anti fallibilist notion that there
doesn't really take seriously the
beginning of infinity that even Dan will
be at the beginning of infinity even
then when he thinks there will be almost
at the peak like david says well we will
just see more problems from that point
they'll still be existential problems
how can we get rid of all the accursed
attentional problems how can we stop all
the stars exploding well maybe we can
but once we do that how can we stop the
universe expanding and so on the
problems will always be there we'll
always discover something new and when
you discover something here you end up
creating a wall you end up in crack you
end up finding a whole bunch more
problems and there's this funny moment
where David says um he doesn't see a
reason why there should be a limit on
the size of mistake we can make in Sam
laughs at that but I think I think that
um
Sam's kind of laughing nervously it's
like a reflex because he doesn't have an
answer to that he kind of gets it he's a
very intelligent person and he
understands that indeed there's no
maximum size on the problems we might
make even in the future and so things
could go terribly wrong even then and so
I think it kind of almost gets there and
realizes that oh you can't really be on
a peak because if you're on a pig thing
you've kind of solved everything but
that's not possible you can still make
mistakes we're fallible people with ten
minutes to go we're 10 minutes to go in
the conversation Sam's still asking what
the disagreement is he mentions morality
as being a navigation problem david says
we'll change what we mean by better and
worse so even if we think right now we
should go this way rather than that way
well in the future we might realize that
that was a terrible error that we could
change our minds about what is right and
wrong and and David also says that
neuroscience can't be very relevant
because and Sam agrees but David
explains again that it's because the
brain is universal and I'm not sure that
Sam quite understands what that means
and this is a subtle point this is very
difficult I don't know that many people
really have comprehended the
significance of that the brain is use of
universal people are universal human
beings are people precisely because
their universal knowledge creators the
universal explainers they're creative
that's what it means to be creative and
David points out again that if we were
in a matrix like Sam imagined earlier on
then no moral question would have
anything to do with science because that
matrix this program is fake program that
would all be uploaded into we wouldn't
have physical laws that are instantiated
in physical reality instead of we based
upon simulated physical laws so any
decision you made there wouldn't have
anything to do with science they'd have
to do with the laws that are
instantiated inside of the program but
if the programmer decided
putting there that's what if you think
that morality is anchored to science
then you'd have to admit that at that
point morality then becomes anchored to
the rules of the program the rules of
the computer game or the matrix the
Orion and again that can't be true
because morality has an objective
reality beyond the matrix beyond our
physical reality as well even though
truths about physical reality might be
relevant at times tomorrow Elly
they can't get you can't use morality
can't be derived from the laws of
physics or from the laws of neuroscience
or anything else and sam says he wants
to talk more about that another time so
I'd love to hear that conversation you
should tune in to be just a final two
minutes of that particular podcast by
the way there's a good life a good joke
so I hope that in some way to trying to
tease out what the difference is I think
there were a number of differences there
that least of which is foundationalism
in this conception about what morality
is and that when you've got moral
theories really the moral theories that
we often talk about like natural law and
utilitarianism and the golden rule etc
they're really these should be seen as
critiques critiques to use in order to
find out what is wrong with other
theories or with other proposals within
the domain of morality but morality is
about solving moral problems just the
way that science is about solving
scientific problems hope that was useful